{{AfC submission|||ts=|u=|ns=118}}
<!--
SUBMISSION NOTES (delete this comment block before submitting):

1. Do not publish this directly to mainspace. Go to
   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Articles_for_creation
   and paste this into the Article Wizard as a DRAFT.
2. Disclose the conflict of interest: on your user page and on the draft's
   talk page, state that you are the creator of Paintlang, per WP:COI and
   WP:PAID (unpaid COI still requires disclosure).
3. The article will be DECLINED until the {{cn}} slots below are replaced
   with at least 2-3 pieces of significant coverage in independent reliable
   sources (tech press, print media, academic papers). Launch coverage from
   Hacker News threads, Reddit, or blog posts generally does NOT count.
   Wait until real coverage exists, then cite it and submit.
4. Everything stated below is verifiable against the product itself or its
   public repository; claims that could not survive a neutrality check were
   left out on purpose. Keep it that way - promotional wording is the second
   most common decline reason after notability.
-->

{{Infobox software
| name                   = Paintlang
| logo                   =
| screenshot             =
| caption                = The Paintlang studio, showing code and canvas side by side
| developer              = Shashank Mallik
| released               = {{Start date and age|2026}}
| programming language   = [[JavaScript]]
| platform               = [[Web browser]]
| genre                  = [[Live coding]], [[creative coding]], [[raster graphics editor]]
| license                = [[MIT License]] (client); proprietary (image tracing service)
| website                = {{URL|https://paintlang.com}}
}}

'''Paintlang''' is a free [[web application|web-based]] [[live coding]] environment for visual art in which a painting's [[source code]] and its rendered canvas are presented as two editable views of the same artwork. Typing code re-renders the canvas as the user types, while painting, dragging, or recoloring elements directly on the canvas rewrites the corresponding literals in the source code.{{cn}}

Paintlang has been described as a visual-art analogue of live-coding music environments such as [[Sonic Pi]] and [[TidalCycles|Strudel]], with the distinction that editing is bidirectional between the code and the output.{{cn}}

== Features ==

The studio runs entirely in the browser and presents a code editor and a canvas side by side. Its domain-specific language exposes scenery primitives (sky, water, mountains, trees), geometric shapes, pressure-sensitive brush strokes, and layer operations as plain JavaScript function calls; the environment maps every rendered element back to the call that produced it, which is what allows direct manipulation on the canvas to rewrite the code.{{cn}}

=== Image tracing ===

Paintlang includes an image tracer that converts an uploaded photograph into a layered painting made of editable code: masses are emitted as outlined forms and detail is emitted as bundles of brush strokes, grouped into semantic layers. Traced paintings declare a painting medium as a constant at the top of the document; changing that one word re-renders the entire painting in a different medium. Fifteen media are supported, including oil, watercolor, ink wash, charcoal, pointillism, and neon.{{cn}}

=== The Coded Gallery ===

The project maintains an online exhibition of [[public domain]] artworks from the [[Art Institute of Chicago]]'s open-access collection, each reproduced as an editable Paintlang program and presented with a replay mode in which the painting paints itself stroke by stroke.{{cn}}

=== Community and sharing ===

Paintings can be shared by link, published to a public community wall, and remixed; remixes credit the original work and author. Shared paintings arrive unrendered and require an explicit keystroke to run, since a Paintlang document is an executable program.{{cn}}

== Licensing model ==

The studio client is [[open-source software]] released under the [[MIT License]], while the image tracing service is proprietary and hosted. The product follows an [[open-core model]]: the studio, gallery, and community features are free, and a paid tier raises capacity limits such as cloud storage counts and daily high-detail traces.{{cn}}

== Reception ==

<!-- Add independent coverage here when it exists. This section is required
     for the article to survive; without it, expect deletion per WP:GNG. -->
{{Empty section|date=July 2026}}

== See also ==

* [[Live coding]]
* [[Creative coding]]
* [[Processing (programming language)]]
* [[p5.js]]

== References ==

{{Reflist}}

== External links ==

* {{Official website|https://paintlang.com}}
* [https://github.com/MallikShashank/paintlang Source repository] on [[GitHub]]

[[Category:Creative coding]]
[[Category:Free raster graphics editors]]
[[Category:Live coding]]
[[Category:Web applications]]
[[Category:2026 software]]
